---
title: 'A parity-dependent lowerbound'
date: 2023-04-12
permalink: /posts/2023/04/
tags:
  - entanglement
---

We show that for flip operator $F$, and the family of maximally
entangled states
$$\operatorname{MAXE}=\{\ket{\Phi}|\ket{\Phi}=\sum\ket{j_Aj_B}/\sqrt{d},\{j\}\text{ is ONB}\},$$
the range of the overlap between $F$ and $\ket{\Phi}$ depends on the
parity of the dimension. Specifically,
$$\{\langle{\Phi|F|\Phi}\rangle|\ket{\Phi}\in\operatorname{MAXE}\}=\begin{cases}[-1,1]&d=2k\\
[-\frac{d-2}{d},1]&d=2k+1\end{cases}$$

This is odd at the first sight, because it is hard to imagine that this
has something to do with the parity of the dimension. However the
eigenspace of $F$ may be the reason: when $d$ is even the $+1$ and $-1$
eigenspaces of $F$ are of the same dimension, while in the odd case $+1$
eigenspace is one-dimensional larger. Then maybe with local unitary one
cannot send $\ket{\Phi_+}$ to the $-1$ eigenspace completely.

By direct computation one can have $$\begin{aligned}
\langle{\Phi|F|\Phi}\rangle=&\langle{\Phi_+|U^\dagger\otimes IFU\otimes I|\Phi_+}\rangle\\
=&\langle{\Phi_+|U^\dagger\otimes II\otimes U|\Phi_+}\rangle\\
=&\langle{\Phi_+|U^\dagger U^{\intercal}\otimes I|\Phi_+}\rangle=\operatorname{Tr}[U\overline{U}]/d.\end{aligned}$$

It is clear that $\operatorname{Tr}[U\overline{U}]$ is real, and
$U\overline{U}$ again is unitary. So
$\operatorname{Tr}[U\overline{U}]\in[-d,d]$. By taking $U=I$ one gets
upperbound $d$, so the question is that whether the lowerbound $-d$ can
be obtained.

For even $d$, it is known that there exist orthogonal matrix $M_d$ such
that $M_d^2=-I$, by taking anti-diagonal matrix with entries $\pm1$. So
$\operatorname{Tr}[U\overline{U}]$ can be $-d$ for even $d$. But for odd
$d$, we can prove that

For any unitary $U$, the spectral of $U\overline{U}$ is
conjugate-closed: if $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue of $U\overline{U}$, then
$\overline{\lambda}$ is also an eigenvalue of $U\overline{U}$.

This is because the coefficients of the characterization polynomial of
$A$ is in polynomial of $\operatorname{Tr}[A^{j}]$, which is real for
any $A=U\overline{U}$. Then the characterization polynomial has real
coefficients, so eigenvalues come in pair.

This lemma implies nothing in the even case, but for odd $d$, it
immediately implies that one of the eigenvalues of $U\overline{U}$ is
$\pm1$. And note that $\det(U\overline{U})=\det(U)\overline{\det(U)}$ is
positive, that eigenvalue must be $1$. So $U\overline{U}=1\oplus W$ for
some $d-1$ dimensional unitary $W$, which has trace at least $-(d-1)$.
So $\operatorname{Tr}[U\overline{U}]=1+\operatorname{Tr}[W]\ge-d+2$.
This new bound can be obtained simply by taking $U=1\oplus O$ where
$O^2=-I$ is a $d-1$ dimensional orthogonal matrix.

Acknowledgement
===============

We thank Kean Chen and Jurij Volcic for valuable discussion.